.trellis/spec/guides/index.md, before:

# Thinking Guides

> **Purpose**: Expand your thinking to catch things you might not have considered.

---

## Why Thinking Guides?

**Most bugs and tech debt come from "didn't think of that"**, not from lack of skill:

- Didn't think about what happens at layer boundaries → cross-layer bugs
- Didn't think about code patterns repeating → duplicated code everywhere
- Didn't think about edge cases → runtime errors
- Didn't think about future maintainers → unreadable code

These guides help you **ask the right questions before coding**.

---

## Available Guides

| Guide | Purpose | When to Use |
|-------|---------|-------------|
| [Code Reuse Thinking Guide](./code-reuse-thinking-guide.md) | Identify patterns and reduce duplication | When you notice repeated patterns |
| [Cross-Layer Thinking Guide](./cross-layer-thinking-guide.md) | Think through data flow across layers | Features spanning multiple layers |
| [Cross-Platform Thinking Guide](./cross-platform-thinking-guide.md) | Catch platform-specific assumptions | Scripts, paths, commands |

---

## Quick Reference: Thinking Triggers

### When to Think About Cross-Layer Issues

- [ ] Feature touches 3+ layers (API, Service, Component, Database)
- [ ] Data format changes between layers
- [ ] Multiple consumers need the same data
- [ ] You're not sure where to put some logic

→ Read [Cross-Layer Thinking Guide](./cross-layer-thinking-guide.md)

### When to Think About Code Reuse

- [ ] You're writing similar code to something that exists
- [ ] You see the same pattern repeated 3+ times
- [ ] You're adding a new field to multiple places
- [ ] **You're modifying any constant or config**
- [ ] **You're creating a new utility/helper function** ← Search first!

→ Read [Code Reuse Thinking Guide](./code-reuse-thinking-guide.md)

### When to Think About Cross-Platform Issues

- [ ] Writing scripts that users will run directly
- [ ] Adding usage examples or help text
- [ ] Working with file paths or commands
- [ ] **Migrating from shell scripts to Python**

→ Read [Cross-Platform Thinking Guide](./cross-platform-thinking-guide.md)

---

## Pre-Modification Rule (CRITICAL)

> **Before changing ANY value, ALWAYS search first!**

```bash
# Search for the value you're about to change
grep -r "value_to_change" .
```

This single habit prevents most "forgot to update X" bugs.

---

## How to Use This Directory

1. **Before coding**: Skim the relevant thinking guide
2. **During coding**: If something feels repetitive or complex, check the guides
3. **After bugs**: Add new insights to the relevant guide (learn from mistakes)

---

## Contributing

Found a new "didn't think of that" moment? Add it to the relevant guide.

---

**Core Principle**: 30 minutes of thinking saves 3 hours of debugging.

Commit message:

feat(dev): integrate dev-manager-mcp for AI-driven server management
Add support for dev-manager-mcp MCP daemon to enable AI agents to start development servers without port conflicts. Both Django and Vite servers now respect PORT environment variable with fallback defaults.

- Add .mcp.json configuration template
- Update manage.py to read PORT env for runserver
- Configure vite.config.js to use PORT env for dev server
- Add VITE_PORT support in Django settings for django-vite integration
- Create comprehensive documentation in .trellis/spec/guides/dev-server-mcp.md
- Update CLAUDE.md with MCP workflow instructions

.trellis/spec/guides/index.md, after:

# Thinking Guides

> **Purpose**: Expand your thinking to catch things you might not have considered.

---

## Why Thinking Guides?

**Most bugs and tech debt come from "didn't think of that"**, not from lack of skill:

- Didn't think about what happens at layer boundaries → cross-layer bugs
- Didn't think about code patterns repeating → duplicated code everywhere
- Didn't think about edge cases → runtime errors
- Didn't think about future maintainers → unreadable code

These guides help you **ask the right questions before coding**.

---

## Available Guides

| Guide | Purpose | When to Use |
|-------|---------|-------------|
| [Code Reuse Thinking Guide](./code-reuse-thinking-guide.md) | Identify patterns and reduce duplication | When you notice repeated patterns |
| [Cross-Layer Thinking Guide](./cross-layer-thinking-guide.md) | Think through data flow across layers | Features spanning multiple layers |
| [Cross-Platform Thinking Guide](./cross-platform-thinking-guide.md) | Catch platform-specific assumptions | Scripts, paths, commands |
| [dev-manager-mcp Integration Guide](./dev-server-mcp.md) | Use MCP daemon for dev server management | When starting dev servers for testing |

---

## Quick Reference: Thinking Triggers

### When to Use dev-manager-mcp

- [ ] You need to start a dev server for testing
- [ ] Running tests that require a running server
- [ ] Verifying frontend-backend integration
- [ ] Using Playwright or browser automation

→ Read [dev-manager-mcp Integration Guide](./dev-server-mcp.md)

### When to Think About Cross-Layer Issues

- [ ] Feature touches 3+ layers (API, Service, Component, Database)
- [ ] Data format changes between layers
- [ ] Multiple consumers need the same data
- [ ] You're not sure where to put some logic

→ Read [Cross-Layer Thinking Guide](./cross-layer-thinking-guide.md)

### When to Think About Code Reuse

- [ ] You're writing similar code to something that exists
- [ ] You see the same pattern repeated 3+ times
- [ ] You're adding a new field to multiple places
- [ ] **You're modifying any constant or config**
- [ ] **You're creating a new utility/helper function** ← Search first!

→ Read [Code Reuse Thinking Guide](./code-reuse-thinking-guide.md)

### When to Think About Cross-Platform Issues

- [ ] Writing scripts that users will run directly
- [ ] Adding usage examples or help text
- [ ] Working with file paths or commands
- [ ] **Migrating from shell scripts to Python**

→ Read [Cross-Platform Thinking Guide](./cross-platform-thinking-guide.md)

---

## Pre-Modification Rule (CRITICAL)

> **Before changing ANY value, ALWAYS search first!**

```bash
# Search for the value you're about to change
grep -r "value_to_change" .
```

This single habit prevents most "forgot to update X" bugs.

---

## How to Use This Directory

1. **Before coding**: Skim the relevant thinking guide
2. **During coding**: If something feels repetitive or complex, check the guides
3. **After bugs**: Add new insights to the relevant guide (learn from mistakes)

---

## Contributing

Found a new "didn't think of that" moment? Add it to the relevant guide.

---

**Core Principle**: 30 minutes of thinking saves 3 hours of debugging.
